content/crypto.md, before:

+++
title = "Crypto"
description = "A short guide and a list of curated ressources to start investing or trading cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum"
template = "article.html"
+++

## Disclaimer
Please keep in mind that this whole article isn't financial advice. I just wanted to setup a quick *101* on the subject, until I eventually publish general purpose articles on investing and trading.

## Techniques and vocabulary
* ***DCA*** [Dollar-Cost Averaging][0] is an approach that boils down to invest a fraction of your savings on a regular basis, so that your investment isn't too exposed to brutal variations of the market. This way, it doesn't really matter if you buy the market top, and you can stop thinking "I'll buy after the next collapse* and delaying your investments for months or years. If you don't have time, energy or motivation for trading, you should definitely use that technique.

* ***Trading*** Trading is a whole topic itself, and I wouldn't dare summing it up in a few sentences, but this is basically a short term or mid term approach that involves calculating risk and performing technical analysis on an asset. It focuses primarily on the market tendency rather than the intrinsic value of the asset itself. There's a handful of ressources where you can start learning about trading, but I'll just recommend [Crypto Cred][1] on Youtube for beginners.

* ***Spot Trading, Futures, Leveraged Tokens...*** If you start investing in cryptos, you'll most likely issue Spot Orders, which is a simple Offering-Demand contract that is executed when two actors meet an agreement price on the market. I really recommend that you stay away from all complex tools (that includes futures, leveraged tokens, and especially DeFi Yielding) unless you really, *really* know what you're doing (or want to lose everything).

* ***Staking*** Staking consists of giving your tokens to a blockchain protocol. In return, your tokens generate interests after a while, usually between a yearly 4 to 20%, depending on the token and on whether or not your tokens are free to claim or locked for a period. This is a relatively safe approach since you're guaranteed to see your tokens back, and it's generally prefered over simply holding your tokens on a wallet. However, market price variations still apply to your tokens, so you may end up losing money in the very long run (or on the contrary, earning a lot).

* ***DeFi*** Decentralized Finance bloomed over 2021. It's essentially a set of financing tools empowered by a blockchain protocol, where you can yield, swap and lend tokens without the help of a third party service (typically a Centralized Exchange, or CEX, by using a Decentralized Exchange, or DEX). There are a lot of DeFi platforms out there, and I do have tokens in staking and yield farming on Polkadot, Kusama, Solana and Sora, but I won't discuss it here as I think it should be completely avoided for beginners. It's quite easy to get into crypto Ponzi and lose everything.

## Where to buy
I currently have accounts on a dozen of exchanges and services. You may want to favor some depending on where you currently live and pay taxes, but this is the top platforms I'd recommend now:

### Bitpanda
[Bitpanda][2] is a "all-in-one", relatively new actor that allows you to buy cryptos, derived products on stocks (so that you can buy a portion of a Apple stock every month instead of a whole one) and some other assets like gold. It also offers a banking card with a cashback in Bitcoin (provided you hold enough of their utility tokens first, **and pay in crypto**, that is) and ways to automatically allocate funds every month. Its utility token also has token burn and a fidelity program.

It's a very good place to start, especially for citizens of the European Union, and the UX is extremely smooth: it's one of the few platforms wich a painless KYC process (*Know Your Customer*, checking your ID and stuff) and they have several banking certifications in Europe, mainly Austria and France.

[Earn 10 EUR for your first 25 EUR trade on Bitpanda][2].

### CoinList
[CoinList][3] is the *de facto* platform if you want to participate in an Initial Coin Offering (ICO). It also has a unlocked staking program for a few tokens that allows you to earn interest if you simply hold tokens, alongside a handful of other products like lending.

ICOs are usually already overcrowded there, so the experience may be frustrating for you, but I made some interesting deals there.

[Earn 10 USD in BTC for your first 100 USD trade on Coin List][3].

### KuCoin
[KuCoin][4] is a great place if you want to hunt new and small tokens that aren't already listed on other exchanges. It also offers a very large variety of financing tools, and most recently added trading bots.

Of all the exchanges I registered on, KuCoin has probably one of the most painful KYC process, in which you have to hold an ID in front of you, along with a piece of paper with a code on it, and a clear view of your face. But on a daily basis, it's the only Asian exchange I recommend, out of Huobi and Gate.io. Their utility token (KCS) rewards you by simply holding it (it's used for futures on the platform) and I feel it may follow the path of BNB and FTT.

KuCoin is overhauling its referral program, so rewards may change in the future.

[20% reduction on your trades on KuCoin][4].

## Other tools of note

### Tracking tokens price and funds portfolio
[CoinMarketCap][6] is kind of a front page for the Crypto world. It allows you to track tokens price on almost all exchanges that ever existed, track ICOs, token airdrops, funds allocation on several tokens, get a clear news feed... I just use it everyday (and there's no referral code there ;).

### Tracking your tokens and their value
If you're using a lot of exchanges, or even DeFi wallets, it might become difficult to track them and decide when to sell. The issue is even worse if you start transferring tokens between exchanges, as many tools usually don't detect the withdraw correctly and end up displaying duplicate amounts.

[CoinTracker][5] is a tool available for free. It also offers a paid tax assistant, but I have used only another one already.

[Earn 10 USD when purchasing a Tax plan on CoinTracker][5].

## Epilogue
I'll update this page regularly to add topics or useful ressources. I might even end up adding a whole investing section there (or maybe on another website?). Hope this was helpful for you.

Happy trading, and don't all-in on Doge or Shiba.



[0]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/dollarcostaveraging.asp
[1]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCBaU9NXRPjkLGgJy-M7RPCw
[2]: https://www.bitpanda.com/?ref=844855155096542216
[3]: https://coinlist.co/clt?referral_code=AX6QXM
[4]: https://www.kucoin.com/ucenter/signup?rcode=rJS6K8M
[5]: https://www.cointracker.io/i/dDmh9aPZbBAH
[6]: https://coinmarketcap.com/

Commit message:

Update Crypto 101 article
* Add Crypto.com entry
* Add missing publishing date
* Fix some typos

content/crypto.md, after:

+++
title = "Crypto"
date = 2021-11-01
description = "A short guide and a list of curated ressources to start investing or trading cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum"
template = "article.html"
+++

## Disclaimer
Please keep in mind that this whole article isn't financial advice. I just wanted to setup a quick *101* on the subject, until I eventually publish general purpose articles on investing and trading.

## Techniques and vocabulary
* ***DCA*** [Dollar-Cost Averaging][0] is an approach that boils down to invest a fraction of your savings on a regular basis, so that your investment isn't too exposed to brutal variations of the market. This way, it doesn't really matter if you buy the market top, and you can stop thinking "I'll buy after the next collapse* and delaying your investments for months or years. If you don't have time, energy or motivation for trading, you should definitely use that technique.

* ***Trading*** Trading is a whole topic itself, and I wouldn't dare summing it up in a few sentences, but this is basically a short term or mid term approach that involves calculating risk and performing technical analysis on an asset. It focuses primarily on the market tendency rather than the intrinsic value of the asset itself. There's a handful of ressources where you can start learning about trading, but I'll just recommend [Crypto Cred][1] on Youtube for beginners.

* ***Spot Trading, Futures, Leveraged Tokens...*** If you start investing in cryptos, you'll most likely issue Spot Orders, which is a simple Offering-Demand contract that is executed when two actors meet an agreement price on the market. I really recommend that you stay away from all complex tools (that includes futures, leveraged tokens, and especially DeFi Yielding) unless you really, *really* know what you're doing (or want to lose everything).

* ***Staking*** Staking consists of giving your tokens to a blockchain protocol. In return, your tokens generate interests after a while, usually between a yearly 4 to 20%, depending on the token and on whether or not your tokens are free to claim or locked for a period. This is a relatively safe approach since you're guaranteed to see your tokens back, and it's generally prefered over simply holding your tokens on a wallet. However, market price variations still apply to your tokens, so you may end up losing money in the very long run (or on the contrary, earning a lot).

* ***DeFi*** Decentralized Finance bloomed over 2021. It's essentially a set of financing tools empowered by a blockchain protocol, where you can yield, swap and lend tokens without the help of a third party service (typically a Centralized Exchange, or CEX, by using a Decentralized Exchange, or DEX). There are a lot of DeFi platforms out there, and I do have tokens in staking and yield farming on Polkadot, Kusama, Solana and Sora, but I won't discuss it here as I think it should be completely avoided for beginners. It's quite easy to get into crypto Ponzi and lose everything.

## Where to buy
I currently have accounts on a dozen of exchanges and services. You may want to favor some depending on where you currently live and pay taxes in, but those are the top platforms I'd recommend now:

### Bitpanda
[Bitpanda][2] is a "all-in-one", relatively new actor that allows you to buy cryptos, derived products on stocks (so that you can buy a portion of an Apple stock every month instead of a whole one) and some other assets like gold. It also offers a banking card with a cashback in Bitcoin (provided you hold enough of their utility tokens first, **and pay in crypto**, that is) and ways to automatically allocate funds every month. Its utility token also has token burn and a fidelity program.

It's a very good place to start, especially for citizens of the European Union, and the UX is extremely smooth: it's one of the few platforms wich a painless KYC process (*Know Your Customer*, checking your ID and stuff) and they have several banking certifications in Europe, mainly Austria and France.

[Earn 10 EUR for your first 25 EUR trade on Bitpanda][2].

### CoinList
[CoinList][3] is the *de facto* platform if you want to participate in an Initial Coin Offering (ICO). It also has a unlocked staking program for a few tokens that allows you to earn interest if you simply hold tokens, alongside a handful of other products like lending.

ICOs are usually already overcrowded there, so the experience may be frustrating for you, but I made some interesting deals there.

[Earn 10 USD in BTC for your first 100 USD trade on Coin List][3].

### KuCoin
[KuCoin][4] is a great place if you want to hunt new and small tokens that aren't already listed on other exchanges. It also offers a very large variety of financing tools, and most recently added trading bots.

Of all the exchanges I registered on, KuCoin has probably one of the most painful KYC process, in which you have to hold an ID in front of you, along with a piece of paper with a code on it, and a clear view of your face. But on a daily basis, it's the only Asian exchange I recommend, out of Huobi and Gate.io. Their utility token (KCS) rewards you by simply holding it (it's used for futures on the platform) and I feel it may follow the path of BNB and FTT.

KuCoin is overhauling its referral program, so rewards may change in the future.

[20% reduction on your trades on KuCoin][4].

### Crypto.com
I started using [Crypto.com][7] just a few months ago, because I was looking for a banking card allowing me to spend EUR and enjoy some form of cashback. Spending cryptocurrencies directly isn't interesting at all if you're a French citizen because law forces you to declare **every** conversion from any asset to EUR or USD.

I discovered the platform early this year, but only started using it a few weeks ago. The mobile app lets you buy a handful of cryptocurrencies, various staking and liquidity possibilities, but most importantly, a VISA card with cashback on a large variety of transactions, plus additional bonuses once you complete the platform's terms (which is mainly holding a certain amount of their tokens during six months, currently), including a reimbursed Spotify or Netflix subscription.

This is in my opinion the best deal available if you don't want to spend your cryptos, but simply want an attractive cashback. I'll drop another feedback if there's demand for it.

[Earn 25 USD worth of $CRO when staking for a Crypto.com card][7]

## Other tools of note

### Tracking tokens price and funds portfolio
[CoinMarketCap][6] is kind of a front page for the Crypto world. It allows you to track tokens price on almost all exchanges that ever existed, track ICOs, token airdrops, funds allocation on several tokens, get a clear news feed... I just use it everyday (and there's no referral code there ;).

### Tracking your tokens and their value
If you're using a lot of exchanges, or even DeFi wallets, it might become difficult to track them and decide when to sell. The issue is even worse if you start transferring tokens between exchanges, as many tools usually don't detect the withdraw correctly and end up displaying duplicate amounts.

[CoinTracker][5] is a tool available for free. It also offers a paid tax assistant, but I have used only another one already.

[Earn 10 USD when purchasing a Tax plan on CoinTracker][5].

## Epilogue
I'll update this page regularly to add topics or useful ressources. I might even end up adding a whole investing section there (or maybe on another website?). Hope this was helpful for you.

Happy trading, and don't all-in on Doge or Shiba.



[0]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/dollarcostaveraging.asp
[1]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCBaU9NXRPjkLGgJy-M7RPCw
[2]: https://www.bitpanda.com/?ref=844855155096542216
[3]: https://coinlist.co/clt?referral_code=AX6QXM
[4]: https://www.kucoin.com/ucenter/signup?rcode=rJS6K8M
[5]: https://www.cointracker.io/i/dDmh9aPZbBAH
[6]: https://coinmarketcap.com/
[7]: https://crypto.com/app/mwgsjgz3yx
